Documents Jina omni embedding models (#6463)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/machine-learning/nlp/ml-nlp-jina.md

* [`jina-reranker-v3`](#jina-reranker-v3)
* [`jina-reranker-v2`](#jina-reranker-v2)

:::{note}

> Different Jina models have different availability depending on your {{stack}} version. For which embedding models are supported in each version, refer to the [Elastic {{infer-cap}} Service supported models: embedding models](/explore-analyze/elastic-inference/eis-supported-models.md#embedding-models) table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jina model availability varies by {{stack}} version. Refer to the [Elastic {{infer-cap}} Service supported models: embedding models](/explore-analyze/elastic-inference/eis-supported-models.md#embedding-models) table for details.
```

It turns text, images, video, audio, and documents such as PDF into vectors in one shared space, so you can retrieve, cluster, and score similarity across languages and media types from a single index.

The `jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small` model has 700M parameters, supports a 32768 token input context window, and produces 1024-dimension embeddings by default.

For more information, refer to the [Elastic blog post](https://www.elastic.co/search-labs/blog/jina-embeddings-v5-omni-all-media-one-index), the [model card](https://huggingface.co/jinaai/jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small) on Hugging Face, or the [model collection](https://huggingface.co/collections/jinaai/jina-embeddings-v5-omni).

#### Requirements [jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small-req]

To use `jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small`, you must have the [appropriate subscription]({{subscriptions}}) level or the trial period activated.

#### Getting started with `jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small` through Elastic {{infer-cap}} Service [jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small-getting-started]

> This request creates a new {{infer}} endpoint. The URL path uses the `embedding` task type and ends with the `inference_id` you want to use (`eis-jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small` here).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an {{infer}} endpoint that references the `jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small` model in the `model_id` field using the `embedding` task type.
```

the nano version below has a nicer structure

```console

> PUT _inference/embedding/eis-jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small

Reviewer: The EIS page and the Jina models page both have the same PUT request to create the endpoint for each model, and the same boilerplate paragraph after it. Those are obvious candidates for snippets, since the content is literally identical across the two pages.

Think about snippetizing whatever you can :)

    }
  ]
}
```

##### Custom endpoint with truncated embedding dimensions (Matryoshka-style output size)

You can create another endpoint with a smaller dimensions value if you want shorter vectors from the same model. Smaller vectors, such as 32 dimensions, can reduce storage usage and improve search speed.

```console
PUT _inference/embedding/jina-omni-small-32d
{
  "service": "elastic",
  "service_settings": {
    "model_id": "jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small",
    "dimensions": 32
  }
}
```

#### Performance considerations [jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small-performance]

* Use short video clips instead of long videos. Embeddings created from long videos are often less accurate for search because they try to represent too much content at once. Splitting videos into short clips or scenes improves retrieval quality.
* Image, video, and audio {{infer}} is typically more expensive than text alone. Batch and chunk content to control latency and cost.
* For long text fields: the model accepts up to a 32768 token context window, but splitting very large passages into chunks often improves latency and per-chunk quality.

### `jina-embeddings-v5-omni-nano` [jina-embeddings-v5-omni-nano]

> {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.5` 

Reviewer: ``````suggestion
```{applies_to}
stack: ga 9.5
```
``````

#### Requirements [jina-embeddings-v5-omni-nano-req]

To use `jina-embeddings-v5-omni-nano`, you must have the [appropriate subscription]({{subscriptions}}) level or the trial period activated.

#### Getting started with `jina-embeddings-v5-omni-nano` through Elastic {{infer-cap}} Service [jina-embeddings-v5-omni-nano-getting-started]

Create an {{infer}} endpoint that references the `jina-embeddings-v5-omni-nano` model in the `model_id` field using the `embedding` task type.

```console
PUT _inference/embedding/eis-jina-embeddings-v5-omni-nano
{
  "service": "elastic",
  "service_settings": {
    "model_id": "jina-embeddings-v5-omni-nano"
  }
}
```

Reference the `inference_id` of this endpoint in [`semantic_text`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/semantic-text.md) mappings, in `embedding` {{infer}} requests, or in search queries that call the endpoint.

> The examples below use the custom `inference_id` called `eis-jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small` that was created in the earlier PUT request. Replace it with your own `inference_id` or with the predefined endpoint name if needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The examples below use the custom `inference_id` called `eis-jina-embeddings-v5-omni-nano` that was created in the earlier PUT request. Replace it with your own `inference_id` or with the predefined endpoint name if needed.
```

* Larger documents take longer at ingestion time, and {{infer}} time per document also increases the more fields in a document that need to be processed.
* The more fields your pipeline has to perform {{infer}} on, the longer it takes per document to ingest.

### `jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small` [jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small]

> {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.4`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{applies_to}`stack: ga 9.5`
```

```console
POST _inference/embedding/eis-jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small
{
  "input": "The sky above the port was the color of television tuned to a dead channel.",
  "input_type": "ingest"
}
```

#### Performance considerations [jina-embeddings-v5-omni-small-performance]

* Use short video clips instead of long videos. Embeddings created from long videos are often less accurate for search because they try to represent too much content at once. Splitting videos into short clips or scenes improves retrieval quality.
* Image, video, and audio {{infer}} is typically more expensive than text alone. Batch and chunk content to control latency and cost.
* For text-heavy fields, the same guidance as [`jina-embeddings-v5-text-small`](#jina-embeddings-v5-text-small-performance) applies: the model supports a 32768 token context window, but chunking large bodies of text often improves latency and quality per chunk.

### `jina-embeddings-v5-omni-nano` [jina-embeddings-v5-omni-nano]

> {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.4` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{applies_to}`stack: ga 9.5` 
```

`jina-reranker-v2` works best on small, medium or large sized fields that contain natural language.
This aligns best with fields like title, description, summary, or abstract.
The model uses a context window of 1024 tokens and automatically chunks larger content.

> Larger documents take longer to process, and {{infer}} time also increases the more documents are present in the reranking request.

Reviewer: I don't know why we use variables for _inference_ and _Inference_ TBH 😄 

it makes the source unnecessarily hard to read
